French President Emmanuel Macron is holding talks in Moscow with Russian President Vladimir Putin aimed at defusing tensions over Ukraine.

The French leader expressed guarded optimism ahead of Monday’s discussions. “I’m reasonably optimistic but I don’t believe in spontaneous miracles,” he told reporters shortly after landing in the Russian capital.


Macron’s effort is the highest-profile intervention yet by a Western leader to ease the crisis; he will visit Kyiv for talks with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on Tuesday.

The concentration of an estimated 100,000 Russian soldiers and military equipment near the Ukraine border has fuelled Western fears that Moscow may be planning an attack. Russia denies it is preparing for an invasion and has accused the United States-led NATO military alliance of undermining the region’s security.

It wants NATO to bar Ukraine and other ex-Soviet nations from membership and pull back forces from Eastern Europe. Washington and NATO have rejected Russia’s demands as non-starters.

Here are the latest updates:

NATO is considering a longer-term military posture in Eastern Europe to strengthen its defences, Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg has said.

“We are considering more longer-term adjustments to our posture, presence, in the eastern part of the alliance. No final decision has been made on that but there is a process now going on within NATO”, he told reporters in Brussels.

NATO currently has troops rotating in and out of eastern Europe, a so-called persistent, but not permanent, presence.

Germany will send up to 350 more soldiers to Lithuania to help bolster the NATO alliance’s eastern flank, Defence Minister Christine Lambrecht has said.

“We are … strengthening our troop contribution on NATO’s eastern flank and sending a clear sign of our resolve to our allies,” Lambrecht said, adding that the soldiers will be deployed “within a few days”.

The message to allies is “you can rely on us”, she added.

British Defence Minister Ben Wallace says the United Kingdom will send 350 troops to Poland.

The UK last year deployed 100 troops to Poland to help support it with a crisis at its border with Belarus.

“We will add to those … by sending a further 350 British troops to Poland as a bilateral deployment to show that we can work together and send a strong signal that Britain and Poland stand side by side,” Wallace said at a news conference alongside his Polish counterpart.

Al Jazeera’s Dorsa Jabbari, reporting from Moscow, says Macron is seen in the Russian capital as a “man who is trying to make peace”.

“He is coming here in the hopes of trying to clarify some of the sticking points that Russia has when it comes to NATO,” she said.

“There’s also a sense that Macron is trying to position himself to be seen as a peacemaker back home for a domestic audience,” Jabbari added, citing the upcoming French presidential election, which is scheduled to take place in April.



Intercepted communications reveal Russian officers have doubts about full-scale invasion: Report
CNN reports that intercepted messages obtained by the US reveal that some Russian officials are concerned a large-scale incursion into Ukraine would be costlier and more arduous than Putin and other top Kremlin figures realise, citing four sources said to be familiar with the intelligence.

Intelligence and military operatives were among the Russian officials to express doubt, three of the sources told the US news network.

“In the assessments, we see it is clear some people on the [Russian] defence side are not really understanding what the game plan is,” an unnamed senior European official was quoted as saying.


Ukraine’s foreign minister has set out some of Kyiv’s “red lines” as diplomatic efforts to avert a feared Russian invasion continue.

“Among our red lines: no concessions on sovereignty, territorial integrity within internationally recognised borders, no ‘direct dialogue’ with Russian occupation administrations in Donetsk, Luhansk [and] only the people of Ukraine have the right to define foreign policy course,” Dmytro Kuleba tweeted, citing the separatist-held regions in eastern Ukraine.

Expats rally in Kyiv in show of solidarity with Ukraine
Expats in Kyiv have taken to the streets in a show of solidarity for Ukraine.

Attendees at Sunday’s rally said a few hundred people from all over the world – including the US, United Kingdom, Canada and Germany – marched in procession waving flags from their home country to show Ukraine their support.

The march was organised by Stuart McKenzie, 51, a Scottish businessman who has lived in the Ukrainian capital for 30 years.

“We stand by them [Ukrainains] in the streets and they know we love and respect them. We’re just hoping for a peaceful resolution,” McKenzie told Al Jazeera.

Ukraine to unleash ‘bloody hell’ on Russia if it invades: Expert
Al Jazeera spoke to Alexander Khara, a Ukrainian ex-defence official, about the possibilities of a major war with Russia.


UK says ‘NATO is a defensive alliance at its heart’
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson wants to offer Russia reassurance about NATO’s role because it is a defensive alliance and any European democracies should be able to join, his spokesman says.

“Russia has expressed concerns about potential NATO aggression, but we have been clear that those concerns are fundamentally unfounded as NATO is a defensive alliance at its heart,” Johnson’s spokesman said.

“But we do want to work with Russia to provide diplomatic reassurance on that front. It is not about making concessions as the PM and other western leaders have said all European democracies have a right to join NATO.”

Who are the Russia-backed separatists?
Since fighting broke out in eastern Ukraine in 2014, separatist rebels of the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics have been accused of being proxies for Russian interests, if not simply Russian soldiers in disguise.

But who exactly are the rebels in the statelets known as the DPR and LPR, home to 2.3 million and 1.5 million people respectively?

The rouble has recovered to a more than three-week high against the dollar ahead of Putin’s meeting with Macron.

As of 11:34 GMT, the Russian currency had gained 0.5 percent to 75.44 against the US dollar, its strongest level since January 13. Versus the euro, the rouble firmed 0.6 percent to 86.38.

The currency has steadily moved away from a near 15-month low of 80.4125 against the US dollar hit last month. Robust oil prices have helped nudge it back towards firmer footing as has the prospect of continued diplomacy between Moscow and the West.


EU consulting gas suppliers amid Russia concerns
The European Union is talking to the US and other suppliers about increasing gas deliveries to Europe, amid concerns over supply from Russia, the chief of the bloc’s executive arm says.

“We are building a partnership for energy security with the United States, which is primarily about more LNG gas supplies. We are talking to other gas suppliers, for example, Norway, about increasing their supplies to Europe,” European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen told a news conference.

The escalating tensions between the West and Moscow over Ukraine have raised concerns about Russian gas flows to Europe, with gas prices already soaring in recent months amid factors including lower-than-expected imports from Russia.

NATO eyeing Russia’s troop movements in Belarus
NATO is looking to increase its military presence in the Baltic states and Poland in case Russia keeps its troops in Belarus after a planned military exercise, the head of the alliance’s military committee has said.

“Where do we have troops in the alliance continuously, in the different nations – the debate about that is the result of things that are ongoing now. Yes, we are looking at it. There might be changes in the future as a result of these developments,” Rob Bauer, a Dutch admiral who heads NATO’s top military strategy body, told a news conference in Vilnius.

“It very much depends, of course, on whether the Russian troops in Belarus remain in Belarus,” he added.

Ukraine’s foreign minister says he will raise the issue of Berlin’s refusal to provide Kyiv with military hardware with his German counterpart Annalena Baerbock when the pair hold talks in the Ukrainian capital later.

“Germany has repeatedly and publicly explained this decision. We consider these explanations regarding Ukraine to be unfair. We believe that there is a wider space for Germany to act,” Dmytro Kuleba told a briefing. “We must respect the position of the state, but this does not mean that we should not work with it.”

German Chancellor Olaf Scholz will meet Macron and Polish President Andrzej Duda in Berlin on Tuesday, a German government spokesperson says.

A Normandy format discussion – involving France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia – at the adviser level could also happen this week, the spokesperson added.

Scholz is set to meet US President Joe Biden at the White House later.

